.. _standard-parameters:

Standard parameters
===================

In OpenSCM a ':ref:`parameter <parameter-hierarchy>`' is any named
input or output variable of a model, e.g. |CO2| emissions, equilibrium
climate sensitivity, aerosol forcing scaling. As described :ref:`here
<parameter-hierarchy>`, parameters are given in a hierarchy, e.g.
``Emissions`` -> ``CO2`` -> ``Industrial``.

Simple climate models come in many different shapes and forms hence we
do not expect them to all be able to do everything. However, to be
included in OpenSCM they should make sure their parameters fit into
these standard parameters as far as possible to ensure models can be
interchanged easily. Of course, model-specific parameters are also
able to be used (see also :ref:`writing-adapters`).


Conventions
-----------

In the following, 'pre-industrial' refers to an unperturbed state of
the climate. Individual adapters can translate this into whatever year
they need to for their model, but they should do such translations
with this definition in mind.

'Reference period' refers to the period a given variable is reported
relative to the mean of. For example, 'surface temperature relative to
a 1961-1990 reference period' refers to surface temperatures relative
to the mean of the period 1961-1990. We are not yet sure how best to
handle these reference periods in variables, if you have ideas please
contribute to the discussions in `#167
<https://github.com/openclimatedata/openscm/issues/167>`_.


Aggregation
-----------

Parameters in OpenSCM come as part of a hierarchy, in the following
separated by the ``|`` character. For example,
``Emissions|CO2|Energy``. ``Emissions|CO2|Energy`` is emissions of
|CO2| from the energy sub-sector (whatever 'energy' happens to mean in
this context). As far as it makes sense, parameters that are higher in
the hierarchy (e.g. ``Emissions|CO2`` is 'higher' than
``Emissions|CO2|Energy``) are the sum of all the variables which are
one level below them in the hierarchy. For example, if
``Emissions|CO2|Energy``, ``Emissions|CO2|Transport`` and
``Emissions|CO2|Agriculture`` are provided, ``Emissions|CO2`` would be
the sum of these.


Standards
---------

Standard parameters
*******************

Below we provide a list of the OpenSCM standard parameters adapters
must adhere to as far as a specific variable concerns them. Alongside
we give the type of unit that the parameter should be given in and how
it should be expected by adapters. Conversion between particular units
is done automatically if possible.

In the following, ``<GAS>`` can be one of the standard :ref:`gases`.

.. csv-table:: Standard parameters
    :header: "Parameter name 0", "Parameter name 1", "Parameter name 2", "Unit type", "Note"

    ``Start Time``,,, :class:`np.datetime64` object, Time of the first time step of the model run
    ``Stop Time``,,, :class:`np.datetime64` object, Time of the last time step of the model run
    ``Emissions``, ``<GAS>``,, "mass <GAS> / time"
    ``Atmospheric Concentrations``, ``<GAS>``,, "parts per X where X is million, billion, trillion etc.", "Aggregation possible, but does not always make sense"
    ``Pool``, ``<GAS>``,, "mass <GAS>"
    ``Radiative Forcing``,,, "power / area", "Aggregation gives total forcing, but be carful of double reporting, e.g. providing ``Radiative Forcing|Aerosols|Direct Effect`` and ``Radiative Forcing|Aerosols|NOx``"
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``<GAS>``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``Direct Effect``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``Indirect Effect``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``SOx``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``NOx``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``OC``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Aerosols``, ``BC``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Land-use Change``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Black Carbon on Snow``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Volcanic``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``Solar``
    ``Radiative Forcing``, ``External``
    ``<X> to <Y> Flux``,,, "mass / time", "See :ref:`material_fluxes`"
    ``Surface Temperature``,,, "temperature", "Surface air temperature i.e. ``tas``"
    ``Ocean Temperature``,,, "temperature", "Surface ocean temperature i.e. ``tos``"
    ``Ocean Heat Content``,,, "energy"
    ``Sea Level Rise``,,, "length"
    ``Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity``,,, "temperature"
    ``Transient Climate Response``,,, "temperature"
    ``Radiative Forcing 2xCO2``,,, "power / area", "Radiative forcing due to a doubling of atmospheric |CO2| concentrations from pre-industrial level"

.. _gases:

Gases
*****

.. csv-table:: Gases
    :header: "Name", "Description"

    ``CO2``, Carbon
    ``CH4``, Methane
    ``N2O``, Nitrous oxide
    ``SOx``, Sulfur oxide
    ``CO``, Carbon monoxide
    ``NMVOC``, Volatile organic compound
    ``NOx``, Nitrogen oxide
    ``BC``, Black carbon
    ``OC``, Organic carbon
    ``NH3``, NH3
    ``NF3``, NF3
    ``CF4``, CF4
    ``C2F6``, C2F6
    ``C3F8``, C3F8
    ``cC4F8``, cC4F8
    ``C4F10``, C4F10
    ``C5F12``, C5F12
    ``C6F14``, C6F14
    ``C7F16``, C7F16
    ``C8F18``, C8F18
    ``CCl4``, CCl4
    ``CHCl3``, CHCl3
    ``CH2Cl2``, CH2Cl2
    ``CH3CCl3``, CH3CCl3
    ``CH3Cl``, CH3Cl
    ``CH3Br``, CH3Br
    ``HFC23``, HFC23
    ``HFC32``, HFC32
    ``HFC4310``, HFC4310
    ``HFC125``, HFC125
    ``HFC134a``, HFC134a
    ``HFC143a``, HFC143a
    ``HFC152a``, HFC152a
    ``HFC227ea``, HFC227ea
    ``HFC236fa``, HFC236fa
    ``HFC245fa``, HFC245fa
    ``HFC365mfc``, HFC365mfc
    ``CFC11``, CFC11
    ``CFC12``, CFC12
    ``CFC113``, CFC113
    ``CFC114``, CFC114
    ``CFC115``, CFC115
    ``HCFC22``, HCFC22
    ``HCFC141b``, HCFC141b
    ``HCFC142b``, HCFC142b
    ``SF6``, SF6
    ``SO2F2``, SO2F2
    ``Halon1202``, Halon1202
    ``Halon1211``, Halon1211
    ``Halon1301``, Halon1301
    ``Halon2402``, Halon2402

.. _material_fluxes:

Material Fluxes
***************

These variables can be used to store the flux of material within the
model. They should be of the form ``<X> to <Y> Flux`` where the
material is flowing from ``<X>`` into ``<Y>`` (and hence negative
values represent flows from ``<Y>`` into ``<X>``):

- ``Land to Air Flux|CO2|Permafrost`` (mass carbon / time) - land to
  air flux of |CO2| from permafrost
- ``Land to Air Flux|CH4|Permafrost`` (mass methane / time)


Standard regions
----------------

Similarly to variables, regions are also given in a hierarchy. Regions
which are higher in the hierarchy are the sum of all the regions which
are one level below them in the hierarchy (be careful of this when
looking at e.g. |CO2| concentration data at a regional level).

The hemispheric regions should be fairly obvious and well-defined. The
land/ocean split is somewhat fuzzily defined as the transition between
land and ocean does not have a precise definition. We don't provide a
clear definition because a) there isn't an agreed one in the
literature and b) no simple climate model is detailed enough for the
slight fuzziness around these definitions to matter. We choose to put
the hemispheres before the ocean/land split in the hierarchy because
it makes more sense to us but are happy to discuss further if desired
(raise an issue).

Descriptions of the rest of the regions can be found in the
'Description' column below.

**Warning** Be careful, if you mix multiple regional conventions (e.g.
reporting both ``("World", "Land")`` and ``("World", "R5ASIA")``),
then your ``("World")`` total will double count some quantities and so
may provide misleading information. There is no way for OpenSCM to
reasonably keep track of what overlaps with what so we can't automate
this process (if you think you have an idea of how to do this, please
make a PR :D).

.. csv-table:: Gases
    :header: "Name 0", "Name 1", "Name 2", "Description"

    ``World``, , , Entire globe
    ``World``, ``Northern Hemisphere``, , Northern hemisphere
    ``World``, ``Northern Hemisphere``, ``Ocean``, Northern hemisphere ocean
    ``World``, ``Northern Hemisphere``, ``Land``, Northern hemisphere land
    ``World``, ``Southern Hemisphere``, , Southern hemisphere
    ``World``, ``Southern Hemisphere``, ``Ocean``, Southern hemisphere ocean
    ``World``, ``Southern Hemisphere``, ``Land``, Southern hemisphere land
    ``World``, ``Ocean``, , Ocean
    ``World``, ``Land``, , Land
    ``World``, ``R5ASIA``, , Non-OECD Asia - see `IIASA AR5 database`_
    ``World``, ``R5REF``, , Reforming economies of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union (also known as ``R5EIT`` i.e. economies in transition) - see `IIASA AR5 database`_
    ``World``, ``R5MAF``, , Middle East and Africa - see `IIASA AR5 database`_
    ``World``, ``R5OECD``, , OECD - see `IIASA AR5 database`_
    ``World``, ``R5LAM``, , Latin America and the Caribbean - see `IIASA AR5 database`_
    ``World``, ``R5.2ASIA``, , Most Asian countries - see `IIASA SSP database`_
    ``World``, ``R5.2REF``, , Reforming economies of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union - see `IIASA SSP database`_
    ``World``, ``R5.2MAF``, , Middle East and Africa - see `IIASA SSP database`_
    ``World``, ``R5.2OECD``, , OECD - see `IIASA SSP database`_
    ``World``, ``R5.2LAM``, , Latin America and the Caribbean - see `IIASA SSP database`_
    ``World``, ``Bunkers``, , Typically used to capture all non-country associated emissions i.e. international shipping (and sometimes aviation) - be careful with definition


.. _IIASA AR5 database: https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/AR5DB/dsd?Action=htmlpage&page=about#regiondefs

.. _IIASA SSP database: https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb/dsd?Action=htmlpage&page=about#regiondefs
